[docs] ALTER COLUMN TYPE (#17470)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: docs/content/preview/api/ysql/the-sql-language/statements/ddl_alter_table.md

Add the specified constraint to the table.

#### [*alter_column_type*]

Change the type of an existing column. If data on disk is required to change, a full table rewrite is needed.

If the optional `COLLATE` clause is not specified, the default collation for the new column type will be used.

If the optional `USING` clause is not provided, the default conversion for the new column value will be the same as an assignment cast from the old type to the new type.

A `USING` clause must be included when there is no implicit assignment cast available from the old type to the new type.

##### Alter type without table-rewrite

If the change doesn't require data on disk to change, concurrent DMLs to the table can be safely performed.

Example:

```sql
CREATE TABLE test (id BIGSERIAL PRIMARY KEY, a VARCHAR(50));
ALTER TABLE test ALTER COLUMN a TYPE VARCHAR(51);
```

##### Alter type with table rewrite

If the change requires data on disk to change, a full table rewrite will be done and the following semantics apply:
- The action creates an entirely new table under the hood, and concurrent DMLs may not be reflected in the new table which can lead to correctness issues.

> - This action is not compatible with partitioned tables, tables with rules, and tables with CDC streams.

Reviewer: "not compatible": does it fail or corrupt or crash?

Author: See https://github.com/yugabyte/yugabyte-db/pull/17470/commits/186e4996f02df2868d25a4e6d79bf93d99e7b2bf

Author: See https://github.com/yugabyte/yugabyte-db/pull/17470/commits/0eeb9e9d30e709c8b0c3e00a875a7675e5219598

- If the operation fails, it is possible that the existing table is renamed in DocDB. This may lead to issues like yb-admin commands that take table name.

> - If the operation fails, a new dangling table may exist.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If the operation fails, a new dangling table may exist in DocDB. Use `yb-admin delete_table` to drop it.
```

I think it is a DocDB table, not in pg metadata. You can suggest to use yb-admin to delete this table.

> - If the operation fails, it is possible that the existing table is renamed in DocDB. This may lead to issues like yb-admin commands that take table name.

Reviewer 2: Unclear with this statement - "This may lead to issues like yb-admin commands that take table name."

Author: cc @fizaaluthra can you provide more info?

Reviewer 3: I think it would read better if rephrased to: This may lead to issues with yb-admin commands that take table name. And optionally include an example of such a command (`./bin/yb-admin list_tablets`)

Reviewer 2: Thanks @fizaaluthra . So @ddorian - "This may lead to issues with yb-admin commands that take table name. For example,`./bin/yb-admin list_tablets`"

- Altering the data type of a foreign key column is not supported.

> - If there might be concurrent DMLs, the user can first rename the table to fail the DMLs, alter the column data type, and then rename the table again.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If there are concurrent DMLs, you can first rename the table to fail the DMLs, alter the column data type, and then rename the table again.
```

- The operation preserves split properties for hash-partitioned tables and hash-partitioned secondary indexes. For range-partitioned tables (and secondary indexes), split properties are only preserved if the altered column is not part of the table's (or secondary index's) range key.

> Example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Following is an example of alter type with table rewrite:
```

```sql
CREATE TABLE test (id BIGSERIAL PRIMARY KEY, a VARCHAR(50));
INSERT INTO test(a) VALUES ('1234555');
ALTER TABLE test ALTER COLUMN a TYPE VARCHAR(40);
-- try to change type to BIGINT
ALTER TABLE test ALTER COLUMN a TYPE BIGINT;
ERROR:  column "a" cannot be cast automatically to type bigint
HINT:  You might need to specify "USING a::bigint".
-- use USING clause to cast the values
ALTER TABLE test ALTER COLUMN a SET DATA TYPE BIGINT USING a::BIGINT;
```

> Another option is to use a custom function:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Another option is to use a custom function as follows:
```

Add the specified constraint to the table.

#### [*alter_column_type*]

Change the type of an existing column. If data on disk is required to change, a full table rewrite is needed.

> The new column type will be applied automatically to indexes and simple table constraints by casting the initially provided expression.

Reviewer: > by casting

That's not always true

Reviewer: It's not true when options such as `USING` are provided.  I suggest removing the sentence altogether.

A `USING` clause must be included when there is no implicit or assignment cast available from the old type to the new type.

##### Alter type without table-rewrite

If the change doesn't require data on disk to change, concurrent DMLs to the table can be safely performed.

Example:

```sql
CREATE TABLE test (id BIGSERIAL PRIMARY KEY, a VARCHAR(50));
ALTER TABLE test ALTER COLUMN a TYPE VARCHAR(51);
```

##### Alter type with table rewrite

If the change requires data on disk to change, a full table rewrite will be done and the following semantics apply:
- The action creates an entirely new table under the hood, and concurrent DMLs may not be reflected in the new table which can lead to correctness issues.
- This action is not compatible with partitioned tables, tables with rules, and tables with CDC streams.
- If the operation fails, it is possible that the existing table is renamed in DocDB. This may lead to issues like yb-admin commands that take table name.
- If the operation fails, a new dangling table may exist.
- Altering the data type of a foreign key column is not supported.

> - If there might be concurrent DMLs the user can rename the table first to fail the DMLs, alter the column data type, and then rename the table again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If there might be concurrent DMLs, the user can first rename the table to fail the DMLs, alter the column data type, and then rename the table again.
```

Add the specified constraint to the table.

#### [*alter_column_type*]

> Change the type of an existing column. Depending if data on disk is required to be changed, different semantics apply.

Reviewer: > Depending if data on disk is required to be changed, different semantics apply.

Too abstract.  Could be removed or clearer.

Indexes and simple table constraints involving the column will be automatically converted to use the new column type by reparsing the originally supplied expression. 

The optional `COLLATE` clause specifies a collation for the new column; if omitted, the collation is the default for the new column type. 

The optional `USING` clause specifies how to compute the new column value from the old; if omitted, the default conversion is the same as an assignment cast from old data type to new. 

> A `USING` clause must be provided if there is no implicit or assignment cast from old to new type.

Reviewer: Could this be considered plagiarism?  It's word for word the same as PG docs.

Author: From their license: https://www.postgresql.org/about/licence/

> Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute **this software and its documentation** for any purpose, without fee, and without a written agreement is hereby granted, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph and the following two paragraphs appear in all copies.

Reviewer: So do those things need to appear as code comments in this documentation md file?  In which case might as well come up with new wording instead.

Reviewer: This is not resolved

##### Online alter type
 
If the change doesn't require data on disk to change, these semantics apply:

- The action is online and concurrent DMLs to the table can go through.

Example:

```sql
CREATE TABLE test (id BIGSERIAL PRIMARY KEY, a VARCHAR(50));
ALTER TABLE test ALTER COLUMN a TYPE VARCHAR(51);
```

> ##### Offline alter type

Reviewer: online/offline is a bad way to put it.  It isn't particularly offline in that it doesn't block operations.  You even say "should not be performed" rather than "cannot be performed".

It should instead be branched at whether table rewrite is required.

Reviewer 4: I realize that I'm not qualified to review this Doc PR. Please remove me from the list.

Reviewer 3: adding to @jasonyb 's comment perhaps a better way to describe it is that the table rewrite scenario is unsafe (concurrent DMLs may result in data inconsistency etc)

If the change requires data on disk to change, these semantics apply:

- This action is offline, so concurrent DMLs should not be performed while an alter column type operation is happening.
- The action creates an entirely new table under the hood, and concurrent DMLs won’t be reflected in the new table which can lead to correctness issues.

> - This action is not compatible with: partitioned tables, tables with rules, tables with CDC streams and tables with foreign key columns.

Reviewer 3: yes except foreign key column

> - This action is not compatible with: partitioned tables, tables with rules, tables with CDC streams and tables with foreign key columns.

Reviewer 3: to clarify here we should maybe specify altering the type of a foreign key column is not supported.
Currently this note sounds like if a table has a foreign key column then I cannot alter the type of _any_ column

Add the specified constraint to the table.

#### [*alter_column_type*]

Change the type of an existing column. If data on disk is required to change, a full table rewrite is needed.

> The new column type will be applied automatically to indexes and simple table constraints by reanalyzing the initially provided expression.

Reviewer 3: nit: by reanalyzing the initially provided expression.
reanalyzing sounds vague (and a bit confusing because we have `ANALYZE`) -- do we intend to say "casting" or "re-parsing" here?

If the optional `COLLATE` clause is not specified, the default collation for the new column type will be used.

If the optional `USING` clause is not provided, the default conversion for the new column value will be the same as an assignment cast from the old type to the new type.

A `USING` clause must be included when there is no implicit or assignment cast available from the old type to the new type.

##### Alter type without table-rewrite

> If the change doesn't require data on disk to change, these semantics apply:
> 
> - Concurrent DMLs to the table can go through.

Reviewer: collapse single-item list
```suggestion
If the change doesn't require data on disk to change, concurrent DMLs to the table can be safely performed.
```

Example:

```sql
CREATE TABLE test (id BIGSERIAL PRIMARY KEY, a VARCHAR(50));
ALTER TABLE test ALTER COLUMN a TYPE VARCHAR(51);
```

##### Alter type with table rewrite

If the change requires data on disk to change, a full table rewrite will be done and the following semantics apply:

> - This action is offline, so concurrent DMLs should not be performed while an alter column type operation is happening.

Reviewer 3: @ddorian / @ddhodge can we also document this "unsafe" behavior for ALTER ADD/DROP pkey?

> - This action is unsafe, so concurrent DMLs may be dropped and should not be performed while an alter column type operation is happening.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

this is duplicate of below

> - This action is not compatible with: partitioned tables, tables with rules, and tables with CDC streams.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- This action is not compatible with partitioned tables, tables with rules, and tables with CDC streams.
```

- This action is not compatible with: partitioned tables, tables with rules, and tables with CDC streams.

> - If the operation fails, it is possible that the existing table is renamed in DocDB. This leads to no functional issues, but may reflect in the YB admin panel.

Reviewer: > This leads to no functional issues

There are probably issues, like yb-admin commands that take table name.

- Altering the data type of a foreign key column is not supported.

> - If there might be concurrent DMLs the user can rename the table first to fail the DMLs, alter the column data type, and then rename the table again.

Reviewer: unclear suggestion: when do you rename?  I would remove the suggestion.

Example:

```sql
CREATE TABLE test (id BIGSERIAL PRIMARY KEY, a VARCHAR(50));
ALTER TABLE test ALTER COLUMN a TYPE VARCHAR(40);

> ALTER TABLE test ALTER COLUMN a SET DATA TYPE BIGINT USING a::BIGINT;

Reviewer: Add a `USING <function>` example

Reviewer: not done

Reviewer: That is a cast, not function

Author: Added in https://github.com/yugabyte/yugabyte-db/pull/17470/commits/31861f1de0ee4de05b8b1e3164d5ef104e02914c

Add the specified constraint to the table.

#### [*alter_column_type*]

Change the type of an existing column. If data on disk is required to change, a full table rewrite is needed.

The new column type will be applied automatically to indexes and simple table constraints by casting the initially provided expression.

If the optional `COLLATE` clause is not specified, the default collation for the new column type will be used.

If the optional `USING` clause is not provided, the default conversion for the new column value will be the same as an assignment cast from the old type to the new type.

> A `USING` clause must be included when there is no implicit or assignment cast available from the old type to the new type.

Reviewer: > implicit or assignment cast

Did you mean "implicit assignment cast"?  What is the difference between "implicit assignment cast" and "assignment cast" and "implicit cast"?

Author: Changed in https://github.com/yugabyte/yugabyte-db/pull/17470/commits/78f22e5f78b55b21a5563fd8596a46b11b0997d6
